---
layout: default
title: "SSPSA 201704-02: Authentication context bypass in the _multiauth_ module"
---

<aside><div class="sidebar-warning right">
<h2>Date</h2>
May 5, 2017
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>SimpleSAMLphp <= 1.14.13</code>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Medium
<h2>References</h2>
CVE-2017-12869
</div></aside>

# 201704-02

**Authentication context bypass in the _multiauth_ module**

### Background

The _multiauth_ module allows an Identity Provider to let the user choose which authentication mechanism he or she wants
to use. The authentication mechanisms are defined in the `config/authsources.php` configuration file, and a list of
valid sources for _multiauth_ is defined in the configuration of the _multiauth_ source itself.

### Description

There is an issue in the _multiauth_ module allowing an attacker to use any authentication source defined in the
configuration but not explicitly allowed in the configuration of the _multiauth_ module. This issue was due to the lack
of proper validation of user's input, resulting in the execution of arbitrary authentication sources even if they are
not configured by a system administrator to be used in this context.

### Affected versions

All **SimpleSAMLphp** versions before and including **1.14.13**.

### Impact

The fact that the _multiauth_ module explicitly requires to configure a list of allowed authentication sources, makes
the system administrator of an Identity Provider assume only those authentication sources defined in that list will
be possibly used by end users when authenticating to services. However, the issue discussed here allows to authenticate
with other authentication sources, making it possible to bypass authentication or even impersonate other users depending
on the configuration of the IdP, provided that other authentication sources are defined that an attacker can use for
profit, even if they were not intended to be used by _multiauth_.

Even though the consequences can potentially be serious (an attacker authenticating to a service he or she doesn't have
access to, or even impersonating other users or bypassing authentication completely), the ability to exploit this issue
depends on an improper configuration of the IdP, leaving authentication sources available that can be used by a
malicious user.

### Resolution

Upgrade to the [latest version](/download).

### Credit

This security issue was discovered and reported on April 28, 2017 by Michel Minsoul.