---
layout: default
title: SSPSA 201705-01: Session fixation issue and authentication bypass in the authcrypt module
---

<div class="sidebar-warning" style="float: right;">
<h2>Date</h2>
May 5, 2017
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>SimpleSAMLphp 1.14.12, 1.14.13</code>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Critical
<h2>References</h2>
CVE-2017-12868
</div>

# 201705-01

**Session fixation issue and authentication bypass in the authcrypt module**

### Background

In the previous [SSPSA 201703-01](/security/201703-01) advisory, a constant time comparison function was introduced
to avoid _timing side-channel attacks_ when evaluating the authentication token tied to a session (which avoids _session
fixation attacks_), and also when authenticating with the _authcrypt_ module and using passwords hashed with the
[`crypt()` algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crypt_(C)) used in _htpasswd_ files.

### Description

The countermeasure to avoid this timing side-channel attacks consisted on the introduction of the
`SimpleSAML\Utils\Crypto::secureCompare()` function. However, an issue in the implementation of this function introduced
another vulnerability, as the output of the function was always true for strings with equal length, regardless of their
contents, when running a version of PHP older than 5.6.

The issue was due to improper conversion to an integer of individual bytes in both strings, right before applying the
XOR operator to them (`^`). In PHP, the XOR operation applied to strings (or characters) returns always an empty string,
which was then converted to numerical `0` before applying a bitwise OR operation. This implies the result of the
constant time comparison was always `0`, making the function return the boolean `true` even if the contents of the two
strings were completely different.

Strings with different length were not affected, as an specific check for that condition exists in the function.

Similarly, those running a version of PHP equal or newer than 5.6 were not affected, since in their case the
function acts as a simple wrapper to `hash_equals()`.

### Affected versions

**SimpleSAMLphp** versions **1.14.12** and **1.14.13**.

### Impact

The issue described here has a critical impact, as it runs the affected function useless. As such, the session
validation mechanism, consisting on the check for an authentication cookie whose value must be equal to an identifier
held in the session's contents, is also useless, opening for
[session fixation attacks](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Session_fixation) under certain circumstances.

In the same way, authentication with the _authcrypt_ module is also affected by this issue. By exploiting it, an
attacker can authenticate with any account and a random password, provided that the original password is stored in an
_htpasswd_ file and hashed using the `crypt()` algorithm. While this is even more critical than a session fixation
attack, the `crypt()` algorithm has been considered insecure for many years now, and even without this particular
issue it would be possible to exploit it to gain unauthorized access. Therefore, the fix for the issue described here
does not make the use of this algorithm secure, and it should be avoided in any case.

### Resolution

Upgrade to the [latest version](/download).

### Credit

This security issue was discovered on May 5, 2017 by Jaime Pérez Crespo, and reported on the same day by Matt
Schwager.