---
layout: default
title: SSPSA 201612-04: Session fixation attack against the OAuth Request Token approval flow
---

<aside><div class="sidebar-warning" style="float: right;">
<h2>Date</h2>
March 30, 2017
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>SimpleSAMLphp <= 1.14.11</code>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Medium
</div></aside>

# 201612-04

**Session fixation attack against the OAuth Request Token approval flow**

### Background

A [session fixation attack was discovered years ago](https://oauth.net/advisories/2009-1/) against the OAuth Request
Token approval flow in the OAuth 1.0 protocol. In order to fix this issue, the revision A of the protocol was
published.

### Description

An attacker may craft a malicious link including a Request Token and send it to the victim, who may then approve the
use of that token without noticing there is an ongoing attack. The attacker is then able to complete the authorization
flow with such token, and access the protected resources that are exposed by the Consumer site as part of its service.
If the attacker has an account in the Consumer site, the access may then be persistent.

The _oauth_ module in SimpleSAMLphp makes use of an external OAuth library which is included in the module itself. This
library was not compliant with Revision A of the OAuth 1.0 protocol, and therefore was vulnerable to the aforementioned
attack.

### Affected versions

All **SimpleSAMLphp** versions before and including **1.14.11**.

### Impact

Those using the _oauth_ module may be affected by this issue, and therefore access to protected resources may be granted
to malicious third parties with the help of legitimate users clicking on a manually crafted URL and approving access
unsuspiciously.

### Resolution

Upgrade to the [latest version](/download).
