---
layout: default
title: SSPSA 201703-02: Incorrect IV generation for encryption
---

<aside><div class="sidebar-warning" style="float: right;">
<h2>Date</h2>
March 30, 2017
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>SimpleSAMLphp 1.14.0 - 1.14.11</code>
<h2>Severity</h2>
High
<h2>References</h2>
CVE-2017-12871
</div></aside>

# 201703-02

**Incorrect IV generation for encryption**

### Background

Block ciphers make use of random, unique values in order to initialize the algorithm when there is a feedback from one
round to the next. Those values are commonly known as _Initialization Vectors_ or *IV*s. IVs are public (they are
attached to the resulting ciphertext) and therefore they must never be reused, and must be generated by a proper
_Cryptographically Secure Pseudo Random Number Generator_ (CSPRNG) in order to be secure.

### Description

An issue with IV generation has been discovered in the `SimpleSAML\Utils\Crypto::_aesEncrypt()` method, where the IV
is not generated randomly but based on the first 16 bytes of the SHA256 hash of the secret given as a parameter. This
unfortunate bug has two direct implications:

* The security of the secret key is downgraded effectively from 256 bits to 128, given that the first 16 bytes were
made public in the resulting IV.
* The security of the encryption is compromised due to the fact that IVs are reused if the same secret is used twice,
as it happens by default in the `SimpleSAML\Utils\Crypto::aesEncrypt()` method, which uses the salt configured as the
secret.

### Affected versions

All **SimpleSAMLphp** versions from **1.14.0** to **1.14.11**, both included.

### Impact

The issue described here undermines the security of the encryption offered by the
`SimpleSAML\Utils\Crypto::aesEncrypt()` method, and therefore any secrets encrypted with it might be compromised by an
attacker with enough knowledge or resources.

### Resolution

Upgrade to the [latest version](/download).

### Credit

This security issue was discovered and reported on March 29, 2017 by Chris Czub (Duo Security).
