---
layout: default
title: "SSPSA 201809-02: Dangerous use of file_get_contents"
---

<aside><div class="sidebar-warning right">
<h2>Date</h2>
September 27, 2018
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>robrichards/xmlseclibs <= 3.0.1</code><br/>
<code>robrichards/xmlseclibs <= 2.0.1</code><br/>
<code>robrichards/xmlseclibs <= 1.4.2</code>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Info
</div></aside>

# 201809-02

**Dangerous use of file_get_contents**

### Background

XMLSecLibs is a library written by Rob Richards that implements the
[xml-enc](https://www.w3.org/TR/2002/REC-xmlenc-core-20021210/Overview.html) and
[xml-dsig](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmldsig-core1/) W3C recommendations. It allows its users to handle encrypted and
digitally signed XML documents. SimpleSAMLphp delegates encryption and signature handling to this library.

### Description

When processing node references in the `getRefNodeID()` function of the `XMLSecurityDSig` class, URIs are parsed by
means of the `parse_url()` function. When no fragment is parsed by the function, the URI is considered an external
reference that needs to be loaded, and the `file_get_contents()` function is used for that.

Unfortunately, `file_get_contents()` is a dangerous function when used with data obtained from user input, as it is the
case. Using it could allow diverse kinds of attacks, from Denial of Service to loading of remote malicious resources.

### Affected versions

All **robrichards/xmlseclibs** versions 1.x, 2.x and 3.x are affected, up to (including) **1.4.2**, **2.0.1** and
**3.0.1**, respectively.

### Impact

No way to take advantage of this issue has been identified, given that the argument passed to `file_get_contents()` is
the object result of parsing a URI, instead of the string containing the URI itself.

### Resolution

Upgrade to the latest versions of the library.

For SimpleSAMLphp users, run `composer update` or upgrade to SimpleSAMLphp 1.16. Refer to the documentation for
instructions on how to [run composer](https://simplesamlphp.org/docs/stable/simplesamlphp-install-repo).

### Credit

This security issue was discovered during a security audit performed by Cure53 and reported on December 18, 2017.
