---
layout: default
title: "SSPSA 201801-01: Denial of Service in timestamp validation function"
---

<aside><div class="sidebar-warning" style="float: right;">
<h2>Date</h2>
January 25, 2018
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>simplesamlphp/saml2 < 1.10.4</code><br/>
<code>simplesamlphp/saml2 < 2.3.5</code><br/>
<code>simplesamlphp/saml2 < 3.1.1</code><br/>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Info
<h2>Reference</h2>
CVE-2018-6519
</div></aside>

# 201801-01

**Denial of Service in timestamp validation function**

### Background

SAML messages and metadata use timestamps to express the validity of a given document based on the current time. These
timestamps use a common format, `xs:DateTime`, in order to convey precise moments in time. Even though the SAML
standard recommends not relying on time resolutions finer than milliseconds, the fact is that implementors use different
precisions and therefore the SAML2 library tries to accommodate for all possible (and legal) values.

### Description

When parsing a timestamp contained inside a SAML document, the SAML2 library uses a regular expression to validate its
format and parse its components. The given regular expression sets no limits for the fraction of seconds part, such that
an arbitrary amount of digits can be processed. This opens up the possibility to perform a _denial of service_ attack
by sending a large number of digits as the fraction of a second in a timestamp, making the processing script choke while
evaluating the regular expression.

### Affected versions

All **simplesamlphp/saml2** versions 1.x, 2.x and 3.x are affected, up to (including) **1.10.3**, **2.3.4** and **3.1**,
respectively.

### Impact

An attacker can inject an arbitrary amount of digits into a valid `xs:DateTime` timestamp and send a SAML document with
it to be processed by the library, making it hang while trying to process it, effectively achieving a denial of
service.

### Resolution

Upgrade to the latest versions of the library.

### Credit

This security issue was discovered during a security audit performed by Cure53 and reported on December 18, 2017.
