---
layout: default
title: SSPSA 201911-02: Information disclosure
---

<div class="sidebar-warning" style="float: right;">
<h2>Date</h2>
November 19, 2019
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>SimpleSAMLphp 1.17.0 - 1.17.7</code><br/>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Low
</div>

# 201911-02

**Information disclosure**

### Background

SimpleSAMLphp 1.17 includes a preview of the new user interface to be included in the future version 2.0. This new user
interface can be enabled by setting the `usenewui` configuration option to `true`, and it includes a new admin interface
in a module called _admin_, which can be disabled.

### Description

The new admin interface includes a way to view information about the host where SimpleSAMLphp is installed, by means of
the `phpinfo()` PHP function. An endpoint that exposes the output of that function is included in the admin module for
easier debugging.

The aforementioned endpoint had no checks for administrator privileges. This would allow any individual
to access the given endpoint without authenticating, gathering information about the affected system.

### Affected versions

All SimpleSAMLphp 1.17 versions up to 1.17.7 are affected, provided that the new, experimental use interface is enabled,
together with the new _admin_ module.

### Impact

An attacker could leverage this issue by accessing the unprotected endpoint and gather intelligence about the host where
SimpleSAMLphp is deployed, using it later for their own advantage in case other issues arise.

However, the impact of this issue is deemed as low, given that the new user interface must be explicitly enabled by
means of the `usenewui` configuration option, and the new _admin_ module must also be enabled.

### Resolution

Upgrade to SimpleSAMLphp 1.17.8 or 1.18. This can be done by downloading the package, or by running `composer update`.
Refer to the documentation for instructions on how to
[run composer](https://simplesamlphp.org/docs/stable/simplesamlphp-install-repo).

Alternatively, the issue can be mitigated by either disabling the new user interface by setting the `usenewui`
configuration option to `false`, or by disabling the _admin_ module in the configuration:

```
    'module.enable' => [
        ...
        'admin' => false,
        ...
    ],
```

### Credit

This security issue was reported  by Dirk-jan Mollema and reported on November 19, 2019.
