---
layout: default
title: SSPSA 202001-02: Log injection
---

<aside><aside><div class="sidebar-warning" style="float: right;">
<h2>Date</h2>
January 24, 2020
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>SimpleSAMLphp <= 1.18.3</code><br/>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Low
</div></aside></aside>

# 202001-02

**Log injection**

### Background

SimpleSAMLphp has a logging functionality that allows system administrators to keep track of the activity, errors, and
statistics. Additionally, it allows users to report errors, shall they happen. An error report contains a report
identifier, which is logged once submitted.

### Description

The `www/errorreport.php` script, which receives error reports and sends them via email to the system administrator,
didn't properly sanitize the report identifier obtained from the request. This allows an attacker, under specific
circumstances, to inject new log lines by manually crafting this report ID.

When configured to use the `file` logging handler, SimpleSAMLphp will output all its logs by appending each log line to
a given file. Since the `reportID` parameter received in a request sent to `www/errorreport.php` was not properly
sanitized, it was possible to inject newline characters into it, effectively allowing a malicious user to inject new
log lines with arbitrary content.

### Affected versions

SimpleSAMLphp versions up to **1.18.3**.

### Impact

An attacker may use this issue to inject logs messages into a SimpleSAMLphp log file, trying to trick or confuse system
administrators. However, the attack surface is considered small, as the attack will only work with the `file` logging
handler, which opens the log file in _append-only_ mode. This means an attacker cannot edit or remove existing log
messages, and even if non-ascii characters are written to the log, the file will always be readable with a simple text
editor.

### Resolution

Upgrade the SimpleSAMLphp installation to version **1.18.4**.

### Credit

This vulnerability was discovered and reported by Frederic Vleminckx on January 23, 2020.