---
layout: default
title: "SSPSA 202309-01: Security header regression in 2.0"
---

<aside><div class="sidebar-warning right">
<h2>Date</h2>
1 September 2023
<h2>Affected versions</h2>
<code>SimpleSAMLphp 2.0.0 - 2.0.5</code><br/>
<h2>Severity</h2>
Low
</div></aside>

# 202309-01

**Security header regression in SimpleSAMLphp 2.0**

### Description

Web pages can by default be loaded in HTML (i)frames from third party
websites. This can be used by adversaries for so-called clickjacking
attacks on a user, by presenting and controlling the legitimate web
page from the surrounding frame.

SimpleSAMLphp 1.x would automatically send the HTTP header
`X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN` in any response. This prevents the browser
from loading SimpleSAMLphp's web pages in another HTML (i)frame, hardening
against this class of attacks.

SimpleSAMLphp 2.0 unintentionally dropped sending this header on all responses,
thereby reducing the hardening of SimpleSAMLphp responses against this
class of attacks.

### Affected versions

SimpleSAMLphp versions **2.0.0** up to **2.0.5** inclusive.

### Impact

The hardening of a SimpleSAMLphp installation may be reduced relative
to the 1.x version of this installation.

There are other ways for an installation to achieve the same hardning, e.g.
setting the same header, or an appropriate header `Content-Security-Policy`
with the `frame-ancestors` property, outside of SimpleSAMLphp. For example
sending this header via the web server or load balancer in front of
SimpleSAMLphp. Installations that set the same effective headers in this
fashion are not affected.

### Resolution

Upgrade the SimpleSAMLphp installation to version **2.0.6**. This
version by default restores the same HTTP security behaviour as was
present in SimpleSAMLphp 1.x.

A new setting `security.headers` has been introduced that allows more
finegrained control of this and other security-related HTTP readers.
Refer to the shipped `config.php.dist` template for more information.

Alternatively or additionally you can ensure to set the security headers
appropriate to your application and risk level via the webserver or load
balancer software.

The website [securityheaders.com](https://securityheaders.com) can help
assess your website's security headers and opportunities to improve.

### Credit

The regression in setting the security header was discovered and reported
by Marcel Hellkamp.

Note that CVE id's are not issued for missing security headers. Therefore
this advisory will not get a CVE assigned.
